Title: Germline missense pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 BRCT domain, p.Gly1706Glu
and p.Ala1708Glu, increase cellular sensitivity to PARP inhibitor olaparib by a dominant
negative effect

Tereza Vaclová

Nicholas T Woods

Diego Megías

Sergio Gomez-Lopez

Fernando Setién

José María García Bueno

José Antonio Macías

Alicia Barroso

Miguel Urioste

Manel Esteller

Alvaro NA Monteiro

Javier Benítez

Ana Osorio

Received 2016 Aug 4; Revised 2016 Oct 3; Accepted 2016 Oct 3; Issue date 2016 Dec 15.

Abstract

BRCA1 -deficient cells show defects in DNA repair and rely on other
members of the DNA repair machinery, which makes them sensitive to PARP inhibitors
(PARPi). Although carrying a germline pathogenic variant in BRCA1/2 is
the best determinant of response to PARPi, a significant percentage of the patients do not
show sensitivity and/or display increased toxicity to the agent. Considering previously
suggested mutation-specific BRCA1 haploinsufficiency, we aimed to
investigate whether there are any differences in cellular response to PARPi olaparib
depending on the BRCA1 mutation type. Lymphoblastoid cell lines derived
from carriers of missense pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 BRCT domain (c.5117G > A,
p.Gly1706Glu and c.5123C > A, p.Ala1708Glu) showed higher sensitivity to olaparib than
cells with truncating variants or wild types (WT). Response to olaparib depended on a
basal PARP enzymatic activity, but did not correlate with PARP1 expression. Interestingly, cellular sensitivity to the agent was associated with the level
of BRCA1 recruitment into γH2AX foci, being the lowest in cells with missense variants.
Since these variants lead to partially stable protein mutants, we propose a model in which
the mutant protein acts in a dominant negative manner on the WT BRCA1, impairing the
recruitment of BRCA1 into DNA damage sites and, consequently, increasing cellular
sensitivity to PARPi. Taken together, our results indicate that carriers of different BRCA1 mutations could benefit from olaparib in a distinct way and show
different toxicities to the agent, which could be especially relevant for a potential
future use of PARPi as prophylactic agents in BRCA1 mutation
carriers.

Introduction

Carrying a germline pathogenic variant in the BRCA1 gene predisposes
individuals to breast, ovarian and other cancers ( 1 ). Since BRCA1 is an important player in the DNA repair pathway, BRCA1 -deficient cells need to rely on other members of the DNA repair
machinery, which makes them sensitive to drugs which target those repair pathways (e.g. PARP
inhibitors, PARPi). PARP enzymes are involved in a DNA single-strand break (SSB) repair
pathway ( 2 ) and if inhibited, naturally
occurring SSBs cannot be repaired, leading to a formation of double-strand breaks (DSBs) and
replication forks collapse. Unrepaired DSBs in BRCA -deficient cells then
result in cell death ( 3 ). Such synthetic lethal
interaction between BRCA1/2 and PARP1 was first described by Farmer et al. and became a promising therapeutic strategy for breast, ovarian
and other cancers ( 4 , 5 ).

PARPi olaparib, evaluated for its safety and tolerability in multiple studies, shows a
significant clinical activity in patients carrying germline pathogenic variants in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes ( 6–9 ). Based on its encouraging
results, in December 2014, olaparib received a marketing authorization by the European
Commission for the maintenance treatment of platinum-sensitive BRCA -deficient high grade serous ovarian carcinoma and by the FDA (The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration) for the treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2 -mutated women ( 10 ).

However, although carrying a germline pathogenic variant in BRCA1/2 is the
best determinant of response to olaparib, a considerable percentage of these patients do not
show sensitivity to the treatment or display increased toxicity to the agent. A multicentre
phase II trial revealed an objective response rate of 41% in patients with germline BRCA1/2 -deficient advanced breast cancer after treatment with 400mg
olaparib twice daily ( 8 ), and the response rate
varied between 13–41% using olaparib as a single agent in recurrent ovarian cancer ( 11–13 ). Regarding toxicity,
although olaparib is generally well tolerated, grade ≥3 adverse events are not rare ( 7 ) and data about long-term toxicity is not
available yet. Thus, further investigation is clearly necessary for the best utilization of
this potent compound in the clinics.

Taking into account the inter-individual variability in the disease manifestation among
carriers of BRCA1 pathogenic variants, partially explained by the location
and type of mutations in BRCA1 ( 14 ), the objective of this work was to investigate whether there are any
differences in the cellular response to olaparib, depending on the BRCA1 mutation type. In the present study, we describe for the first time that lymphoblastoid cell
lines (LCLs), derived from carriers of pathogenic missense mutations in the BRCA1 BRCT
domain (namely c.5117G > A, p.Gly1706Glu and c.5123C > A, p.Ala1708Glu), show a higher
sensitivity to olaparib than cells with truncating mutations or wild type (WT). These
results indicate that carriers of different BRCA1 pathogenic variants could
benefit from the treatment in a distinct way and that they could display different
toxicities. Moreover, we propose and validate a mechanism by which the cells harbouring
heterozygous missense pathogenic variants in BRCA1 show increased
sensitivity to olaparib.

Results

Cells harbouring heterozygous missense pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 BRCT domain
are more sensitive to olaparib than WT cells or cells with truncating variants

In order to investigate the sensitivity of BRCA1 heterozygous mutation
carrier cells to olaparib we used a previously characterized panel of 21 LCLs ( 15 ). Viability assay revealed that LCLs derived
from carriers of BRCA1 truncating variants showed comparable sensitivity
levels to various concentrations of olaparib as WT cells ( Fig. 1A and B ). Average values and standard deviations from three
independent experiments are listed in Supplementary Material, Table S1 . On the other hand, cells harbouring missense
pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 BRCT domains were significantly more sensitive to 8μM
olaparib than both WTs and cells with truncating mutations.

Effect of BRCA1 germline pathogenic variants on the sensitivity of LCLs to
olaparib. ( A ) MTT assay displaying proliferation changes of 21 LCLs
treated with indicated concentrations of olaparib (OLP) for 72 h, relative to
control cells (treated with DMSO). 6 wild-type (WT, blue lines) LCLs, 5 LCLs
carrying missense pathogenic variants c.5117G > A and c.5123C > A (MIS, red
lines), and 10 LCLs with truncating mutation in BRCA1 (TRUN, grey
and black lines) were analysed. Values represent a mean and standard deviation of
viabilities obtained in three independent experiments. ( B ) Mean
viabilities of all LCLs belonging to one group (WTs in blue, MIS in red, TRUN in
black) relative to DMSO-treated cells. P- values were calculated
with a linear regression model using the cellular growth rate as a
covariate.

The cellular growth rate (GR) did not vary between groups of LCLs depending on their
BRCA1 mutation status, however, the GR and viability of cells after treatment with
olaparib were significantly negatively correlated ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S1 ). Because of this relationship, GR was
taken into account as a cofounding factor while performing the statistical analysis of
cellular response to olaparib ( P- value in Fig. 1B ). Nevertheless, the differences in response of mutated
cells to olaparib remained significant, indicating a GR-independent variability in
cellular sensitivity to this agent.

Transcriptional activation function of the BRCA1 BRCT domains does not seem to be
involved in modulation of cellular sensitivity to olaparib

Predicted co-occurrence of mutant and WT BRCA1 protein in cells carrying heterozygous
missense variants, previously studied in our lab ( 15 ), brings the possibility of a dominant-negative effect of the mutant. We used
a well-described cell-based transcriptional assay ( 16 , 17 ) to measure the ability of
BRCA1 C-terminal region to activate transcription of a reporter gene, a function dependent
on the BRCT domains where both missense variants from our panel are located.
Transcriptional activity of constructs containing WT BRCA1 (positive control) and missense
variants M1775R (negative control), G1706E and A1708E, and a combination of WT + A1708E in
a HEK293FT cellular model ( Fig. 2A and B ) was
analysed. Co-transfection of WT and A1708E constructs mimicked the heterozygous status
present in our LCLs and allowed us to test a possible negative effect of the mutated
variant on WT protein function.

Functional analysis of missense
variants in BRCA1. ( A ) Diagram of construct visualizing BRCA1 missense
variants tested in this experiment. Grey boxes indicate the DNA binding domain (DBD)
of GAL4, and the N- and C-terminal BRCT domains. ( B ) Diagram of the
five GAL4 DNA binding sites located upstream of the luciferase reporter gene.
Adapted from ( 31 ). ( C )
Transfection efficiency was confirmed by Western blot using anti-GAL4-DBD antibody.
High levels of a specific antibody and an overabundance of the overexpressed protein
caused intense localized signals and, consequently, white bands at exposed film.
( D ) Quantitative transcriptional assay in HEK293FT cells treated with
DMSO (control) or 16μM OLP (olaparib) for 24 h. Results are displayed as a
percentage of DMSO-treated cells overexpressing WT construct, the error bars
represent standard deviation from triplicates. The graph shows results from one out
of three independent experiments.

Western blot analysis confirmed an overexpression of all transfected BRCA1 constructs in
both DMSO- and olaparib-treated HEK293FT cells ( Fig.
2C ). As expected, WT BRCA1 was able to activate transcription of the reporter
gene ( Fig. 2D ) whereas the negative control
and both tested missense variants (G1706E, A1708E) displayed an altered ability to
transcribe the luciferase gene. On the other hand, co-transfection of constructs
containing WT and A1708E variants led to a transcriptional activation, which was
comparable to the one induced by WT construct alone, indicating that the A1708E variant
does not act in a dominant-negative manner to a WT BRCA1 transcriptional activation
function.

Olaparib slightly decreased the ability of WT BRCA1 to activate transcription of the
reporter gene (82% of the WT), however the decrease did not reach the threshold of 50% to
be considered of functional impact.

Olaparib induces changes in BRCA1 BRCT protein interactors and phosphorylation of
threonine residue at position 1834

To further investigate whether olaparib treatment influences functions mediated by the
BRCA1 BRCT domains, we analysed BRCT-mediated protein interactions and examined whether
they are modulated by PARP inhibition. For this purpose, we used HEK293FT cells
overexpressing the BRCA1 BRCT domains, which was either WT or carrying the G1706E variant,
and treated them either with DMSO (control) or olaparib (16μM). We then analysed
BRCT-bound protein complexes by tandem affinity purification coupled with mass
spectrometry (TAP-MS) (detailed protocol in the Materials and Methods section).

We were unable to overexpress the mutated BRCT at levels sufficient for further mass
spectrometry analysis ( Supplementary
Material, Fig. S2A ). However, even the effect of olaparib treatment on the WT
BRCT protein interactions provided a valuable insight into the mechanism of olaparib
action. After applying the SAINT (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) algorithm ( 18 ) to our data and setting a probability
threshold of 0.8 − 1, we ended up with a list of 121 protein interactors ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S2A )
(full list shown in Supplementary
Material, Table S2 ). Most of the proteins (108/121 = 89%) were found to interact
with BRCT in both control and olaparib-treated cells. However, 11 interactors were found
to be olaparib treatment-specific ( Table 1 ).

BRCA1 BRCT interacting proteins specific for olaparib-treated
cells

Abbreviations: GO, Gene Ontology; OLP,
olaparib.

To get further insights into the functional roles of proteins interacting with the BRCA1
BRCT domain, we performed an enrichment analysis of the set of 121 proteins by using
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), taking into account the value of fold-change spectral
counts. As expected, among the top canonical pathways related to this set of proteins was
“Role of BRCA1 in DNA Damage Response”, which was found to be downregulated in
olaparib-treated cells (as indicated by the negative z-score value of -1.6) and which
indicates an alteration of this pathway by the treatment ( Supplementary Materials, Fig. S3A, Table
S3 ). The interactors were also found to be significantly involved in several
molecular and cellular functions, such as “DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair”
( Supplementary Material, Fig.
S3B ), and they were connected into a highly scored network within members of this
function (score 61) ( Supplementary
Material, Fig. S3C ).

In addition, we detected a new BRCA1 phosphorylation site at position T1834 (located at
the end of the C-terminal BRCT domain) in the olaparib-treated cells. According to the
PhosphoSitePlus database ( www.phosphosite.org ) there are 109 BRCA1 phosphorylation sites reported up
to date and they are implicated in various cellular processes ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S4 ).
However, the phosphorylation site at threonine 1834 has not been previously reported and
could be therefore connected to an olaparib-specific response. According to the GPS 3.0
kinase prediction software ( 19 ), MLK3 is the
most likely regulatory kinase responsible for olaparib-induced BRCA1 T1834 phosphorylation
( Supplementary Material, Table
S4 ).

PARP1 enzymatic activity positively correlates with sensitivity of cells to
olaparib

In order to explain the mutation type-dependent differences in the response of cells to
olaparib we investigated factors that could potentially influence sensitivity to this
treatment, including PARP1 gene and protein expression and its enzymatic
activity. PARP1 mRNA expression was significantly decreased in cells
harbouring truncating variants in BRCA1 compared to WT controls ( Fig. 3A ; P = 0.028), the same
cell lines which showed significantly lower expression of BRCA1 (15).
However, although PARP1 mRNA and protein expression were significantly positively
correlated ( Fig.
3C; P = 0.027), differences in PARP1 protein levels between WT and
truncating groups failed to reach statistical significance ( Fig. 3B–D ). Cells with missense and truncating variants showed no
significant differences in PARP1 protein levels.

PARP1 mRNA and protein expression in LCLs.
( A ) Relative PARP1 mRNA level in 6 WT LCLs, 5 LCLs
carrying missense pathogenic variants, and 10 LCLs with truncating variants in BRCA1 (two-tailed Student’s t-test; P = 0.028
for comparison between WT and truncating LCLs; mean of 1.270 ± 0.05 SEM for WT,
1.151 ± 0.05 SEM for missense LCLs, and 1.081 ± 0.05 SEM for truncating LCLs).
( B ) PARP1 protein level in control LCLs and cells harbouring missense
or truncating heterozygous mutation in BRCA1 gene (two-tailed
Student’s t-test; P = 0.073 for comparison between WT and
truncating LCLs; mean of 1.569 ± 0.18 SEM for WT, 1.482 ± 0.26 SEM for missense
LCLs, and 1.129 ± 0.14 SEM for truncating LCLs). ( C ) Significant
positive Pearson correlation between PARP1 mRNA and protein levels
in a panel of LCLs. ( D ) Western blot analysis of PARP1 expression in a
panel of LCLs. Full-length PARP1 (116 kDa) and the large fragment of cleaved PARP1
(89 kDa) were detected using anti-PARP1 antibody and β-actin served as a loading
control. First sample in each blot is identical (WT cell line 09S179-L) and served
for between blots-normalization when analysing protein band densities by ImageJ. *
indicates LCLs which could not be included in the final panel of analysed cell
lines.

Since it has been previously demonstrated that PARP1 expression and
protein level only partially correlate with its enzymatic activity ( 20 , 21 ) we checked
the activity in LCLs using two distinct methods. Measuring poly ADP-ribose (PAR) levels by
Western blot did not reveal any statistically significant differences between groups of
cells ( Fig. 4A ). In order to measure the
enzymatic activity more precisely, we used a modified in vitro PARP
activity assay that allowed us to determine basal PARP activity in cell lysates (i.e.
non-induced naturally activated PARP present in LCLs). There were no statistically
significant differences between groups of LCLs depending on their BRCA1 mutation status ( Fig. 4B ). Nevertheless,
results from both experiments indicate that cells harbouring missense pathogenic variants
show slightly elevated PARP activity than cells with truncating mutation ( Fig. 4A and B ), which could make them less
tolerant to PARPi. Indeed, a trend for increased PARP activity in the missense variants
correlated with increased sensitivity to olaparib ( Fig. 4C ) although a causal relationship cannot be demonstrated.

PARP enzymatic activity in LCLs. ( A ) Western blot
analysis of PAR polymers in whole cell lysates isolated from 6 WT LCLs, 5 LCLs
carrying missense pathogenic variant, and 10 LCLs with truncating variants in BRCA1 . PAR was detected using anti-PAR antibody and β-actin
served as a loading control. The first sample in each blot is identical (WT cell
line 09S179-L) and served for between blot normalisation when analysing protein band
densities. Asterisks indicate cell lines which could not be included in the final
panel of LCLs ( B ) Relative PAR polymer levels in whole cell lysates
isolated from a panel of LCLs. The intensity of protein bands was quantified by
Image-J and normalised to WT sample 09S179-L. Median of the data is represented by
the line inside the box plots (median of 1.74 ± 0.15 SEM for WT, 1.76 ± 0.30 SEM for
missense LCLs, and 1.49 ± 0.22 SEM for truncating LCLs). ( C ) PARP
activity in the cellular extracts of LCLs measured as the amount of ribosylation on
histone-coated plates. Line inside of the box plot indicate median of the data
(median of 32.48 ± 2.95 SEM for WT, 35.33 ± 2.15 SEM for missense LCLs, and
33.42 ± 1.67 SEM for truncating LCLs). Graph shows representative results from one
out of three independent experiments. (D) Pearson correlation between PARP enzymatic
activity and viability of LCLs treated with 4μM olaparib.

No association between the sensitivity of cells to olaparib and BRCA1 or PARP1 gene expression was found (P values 0.660 and 0.653,
respectively, for treatment with 8μM olaparib), indicating that expression levels of these
two proteins do not play a role in regulation of the response to this agent.

BRCA1 recruitment into γH2AX foci is lower in cells with missense mutation in the
BRCT domain than in cells with truncating mutation

A recent report from Li et al describes a biphasic recruitment of the
BRCA1 tumour suppressor into DNA damage sites ( 22 ). The early recruitment is dependent on PAR recognition by the BRCA1-BARD1
protein complex whereas the later phase requires functional BRCA1 BRCT domains. Thus,
using PARP inhibitors in cells with altered BRCT domain would lead to an alteration of
both BRCA1 recruitment phases, reassessing the hypothesis of a dominant-negative effect.
High-throughput confocal microscopy was used to evaluate BRCA1 recruitment into DNA damage
sites (measured by the intensity of the BRCA1 signal within γH2AX foci) in twelve
DMSO-treated (control) or olaparib-treated LCLs.

Already under control conditions, BRCA1 signal intensity in γH2AX foci significantly
varied among groups of LCLs, being the highest in WTs, lower in TRUN and the lowest in
cells with a missense mutation in the BRCA1 BRCT domain ( P value < 0.001 in all comparisons) ( Fig.
5A ). As expected, olaparib treatment significantly increased nuclear γH2AX levels
( Supplementary Material, Fig.
S5 ; P value < 0.001 in all comparisons), which was
accompanied by elevated BRCA1 recruitment in all groups of cells ( Fig. 5A ). However, the cells with BRCT missense mutations again
showed the lowest BRCA1 signal within γH2AX foci from all groups.

Effect of
the BRCA1 mutation type on BRCA1 recruitment into γH2AX sites after treatment with
olaparib. ( A ) High-throughput microscopy quantification of BRCA1 signal
intensity in γH2AX foci of 12 LCLs treated with DMSO (control) or 10μM olaparib
(OLP). The columns represent mean signal intensities detected in 1500 individual
nuclei of four LCLs per group (4 WTs, 4 MIS, 4 TRUN). The differences between groups
were evaluated using Mann-Whitney U test. Data are representative of two replicates.
Error bars indicate SD. *** P < 0.001. (B) Pearson correlation
between cellular viability (after treatment of cells with 8μM OLP for 72 h) and
BRCA1 signal intensity in DMSO-treated (left) or OLP-treated LCLs
(right).

Importantly, BRCA1 recruitment in both DMSO- and olaparib-treated cells was strongly
positively correlated with cellular viability after treatment with olaparib ( Fig. 5B ), suggesting a possible causal
relationship. The recruitment of the protein was not associated with total BRCA1 levels
( r = 0.121; P = 0.709), indicating that the presence
of a functional BRCA1 protein in DNA damage sites, and not the overall BRCA1 protein
expression, influences the sensitivity of cells to olaparib.

Discussion

Olaparib is the first PARP inhibitor being approved by the European Commission as a
maintenance treatment for platinum-sensitive relapsed BRCA -mutated
high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer and by the FDA for treatment of recurrent
ovarian cancer in BRCA -mutated women ( 10 ). However, not all patients that are carriers of BRCA pathogenic variants respond to the drug and a substantial fraction
of them displays resistance and adverse reactions following the treatment ( 9 , 10 ), indicating the need to further investigate the best use of these compounds in
the clinics ( 23 ). There is increasing evidence
that heterozygous pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 gene lead to
haploinsufficiency for some of the multiple BRCA1 functions, including homologous
recombination, repair of stalled replication forks and maintenance of genome integrity
( 15 , 24–26 ). The diversity of BRCA1 functions
indicates that different pathogenic BRCA1 alleles may lead to distinct
phenotypic effects in mutation carriers. Thus, we aimed to investigate whether carrying
various heterozygous pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 gene increases
cellular sensitivity to olaparib and whether and how BRCA1 mutation types
influence such sensitivity.

Strikingly, while the treatment led to a comparable sensitivity of cells harbouring
heterozygous truncating mutations as in WT cells, cell lines carrying the two studied
missense variants (c.5117G > A and c.5123C > A) were the most sensitive group.
Previous studies failed to observe increased sensitivity of BRCA1 -heterozygous cells to olaparib unless they were pre-treated with
either ionization irradiation or UV ( 24 , 27 ). However, these reports were focussed on
truncating mutations while we are, for the first time, analysing carriers of recurrent
missense pathogenic variants in the BRCA1 BRCT domains. A recent study suggests that
response to PARP inhibitor depends on the type of FANCD1 / BRCA2 mutation, supporting our results and
indicating that different mutations in DNA repair genes lead to variable phenotypes ( 28 ). Our results indicate that treatment with
olaparib could lead to an increased toxicity to the drug in individuals carrying
c.5117G > A or c.5123C > A missense variants. Importantly, the olaparib concentration
range used in our experiments was comparable to the peak plasma levels found in patients
treated with this agent in clinical trials. It will be crucial to further validate our
findings in available clinical data and check the level of toxicity and treatment outcomes
in the variant carriers.

In our attempt to explain why cells harbouring c.5117G > A and c.5123C > A pathogenic
variants in the BRCA1 BRCT domains are more sensitive to olaparib we explored the idea of a
dominant-negative effect. Taking into account the expected presence of mutated protein in
cells carrying missense mutation and the absence of truncated protein in cells carrying most
of the truncating variants ( 15 ), there is a
possibility that the missense variants compete with the WT protein for certain functions.
Since the BRCA1 BRCT domains are known to be involved in the transcriptional activation of
target genes ( 29 ) we used a well characterised
transcriptional activation assay ( 30–32 ) to test if the increased sensitivity
of cells with the studied missense mutation to olaparib is caused by a dominant-negative
effect on the BRCT-mediated transcriptional activation function.

Mimicking the heterozygous status present in mutated LCLs by simultaneous co-expression of
WT and A1708E missense variant led to a comparable phenotype as over-expression of WT alone.
These findings suggest that A1708E does not influence the WT transcriptional activation
function, at least in our experimental design when using a fragment of the BRCA1 protein.
Thus, a dominant-negative effect in the transcriptional activation function of the BRCA1
BRCT domain does not seem to be involved in the differences in response of cells to
olaparib.

The high number of BRCT protein interactors allows BRCA1 to play a role in so complex
cellular processes like cell cycle checkpoint regulation and maintenance of genomic
stability ( 33 ). Thus, in order to further
puzzle out whether and how olaparib treatment affects functions mediated by the BRCA1 BRCT
domain, we looked at the BRCA1 BRCT protein interactors in olaparib-treated cells. We
identified 11 olaparib treatment-specific BRCA1 BRCT interactors, which are involved in
various biological processes, such as cell cycle and transcription regulation.

The enrichment analysis revealed that the BRCT domains of BRCA1 interacts with proteins
involved in canonical pathways such as DNA damage response, hereditary breast cancer and
oestrogen signalling, or assembly of the RNA polymerase II Complex. Such results are in line
with previously known roles of BRCA1 BRCT in the maintenance of genome integrity, regulation
of cell cycle checkpoint and gene expression ( 29 ). Interestingly, the canonical pathway “Role of BRCA1 in DNA Damage Response”
was downregulated upon olaparib treatment, in particular, most of the members of the BRCA1-A
complex (including RAP80, BRCC3, Abraxas) showed decreased binding to BRCA1 BRCT in response
to olaparib ( Supplementary Material,
Table S3 ). Decreased binding of RAP80 is in agreement with previously described
interaction of the protein complex PARP1-BRCA1-RAP80 which is dependent on PARP1-mediated
PARsylation of BRCA1, which is inhibited upon olaparib treatment ( 34 , 35 ). Since the
BRCA1-A complex plays a crucial role in DNA damage response by recognition of ubiquitinated
H2AX and recruiting BRCA1 into the DNA damage site ( 36 , 37 ), olaparib treatment might
thus partially affect this BRCA1-mediated function.

In addition, olaparib treatment induced phosphorylation of BRCA1 on the threonine residue
at position 1834, which is located at the very end of the C-terminal BRCT domain.
Phosphorylation of more than 100 distinct sites have been identified in BRCA1 up to date,
however, their involvement in various cellular processes is elucidated only for some of them
( 38 ). Output from the kinase prediction
software GPS3.0 indicates the pro-apoptotic mixed lineage kinase 3 (MLK3) ( 39 ) as the most likely for this olaparib-induced
BRCA1 phosphorylation.

When examining factors that could influence the cellular response to olaparib, we observed
a slightly elevated, although not significant, PARP activity in cells harbouring
c.5117G > A and c.5123C > A pathogenic missense variants in comparison to cells with
truncating variants, indicating differences between these BRCA1 mutation
types that might partially modulate their response to PARP inhibition ( Fig. 4A and B ). Indeed, the correlation between basal PARP
enzymatic activity and sensitivity of cells to olaparib ( Fig. 4C ) indicates that it is, at least partially, dependent on the
ability of PARP to play its enzymatic role. Previous research shows that hyperactivation of
PARP1 is associated with an increased sensitivity of cells to PARP inhibitors, caused by a
homologous recombination-defective phenotype ( 40 ).

To further explore the correlation between cellular sensitivity to olaparib and PARP
enzymatic activity we investigated their connection to BRCA1-mediated DNA repair. Following
on the exploration of the dominant-negative effect of our missense variants to explain their
higher sensitivity to olaparib we tested a model that involves previously described
two-phase BRCA1 recruitment to the DNA DSBs ( 22 , 41 ). Based on the research
carried on by Li et al. , WT BRCA1 heterodimerizes with BARD1 through its
RING domain and is recruited into DSB ends by the interaction of BARD1 with PAR polymers
within a minute post damage (early recruitment) ( Fig.
6A ). The late recruitment of BRCA1 into γH2AX foci, phosphorylated H2AX playing a
critical role in downstream signalling after the formation of DSBs and in retention of
repair factors in the site of damaged DNA ( 42 ), takes part within minutes after damage. It requires functional BRCA1 BRCT
domains and is dependent on a direct interaction with p-Abraxas, a member of the BRCA1-A
complex subunit.

Figure
6.

A hypothesized effect of missense mutation in BRCA1 BRCT domain on
the protein recruitment to the DNA DSBs after treatment with olaparib.
( A ) During the early recruitment phase, WT BRCA1 interacts with BARD1
through their RING domain and a recruitment of the heterodimer into DSB is mediated by
BARD1 BRCT recognition of PAR. On the other hand, the late phase is dependent on BRCA1
BRCT domains and their interaction with phosphorylated Abraxas, a member of the
BRCA1-A protein complex (adapted from Baer et al. and Li et
al. ). ( B ) In WTs, olaparib (OLP) treatment blocks the early
recruitment phase by inhibition of PAR synthesis, which makes treated cells more
dependent on the late recruitment phase. According to our results, OLP could also lead
to phosphorylation of the C-terminal BRCT domain at threonine 1834, and decrease of
binding of the BRCA1 BRCT domain to BRCA1-A complex. ( C ) OLP treatment of
cells harbouring heterozygous MIS mutation in the BRCA1 BRCT domain impacts both early
and late recruitment phases. The altered BRCA1 protein could possibly compete WT BRCA1
for the members of BRCA1-A complex, which at the end leads to a decreased recruitment
of the protein to damaged DNA.

We propose that olaparib-induced inhibition of the early recruitment of BRCA1 into DSBs by
preventing PAR polymerization makes cells more dependent on the late recruitment phase
( Fig. 6C ). Moreover, olaparib-induced decrease
in the BRCA1-A complex and BRCT interaction, shown by mass spectrometry, might make the
cells rely on the remaining functions of the late recruitment stage even more. Cells
harbouring heterozygous truncating mutation in the BRCA1 gene frequently
lack the mutated protein due to the degradation of a mutated transcript by the
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay mechanism ( 15 , 43 ). But the remaining WT protein
would be able to function in the DSB repair through the late recruitment phase, which is
consistent with the observed reduced BRCA1 recruitment when compared to WTs. On the other
hand, cells carrying the two studied heterozygous missense mutations contain both functional
(WT) and defective (mutant) BRCA1, as indicated by the comparable range of total BRCA1
protein levels in WT cells and cells carrying the studied missense variants ( 15 ) and detectable, therefore stable, mutants
overexpressed in our TA assays. Thus, the WT and mutant protein could compete to undergo the
late recruitment path to repair DNA DSBs ( Fig. 6B and
D ).

Indeed, confocal microscopy revealed decreased BRCA1 recruitment into γH2AX foci in
non-treated cells carrying c.5117G > A and c.5123C > A missense variants when compared
to WTs or cells with truncating mutations ( Fig.
5A ), supporting our hypothesis about dominant-negative effect of the missense
mutant. Although the exact mechanism of the reduced recruitment remains to be elucidated, it
is likely that the non-functional mutant protein competes with WT BRCA1 for the BRCA1-A
complex, required for an efficient late recruitment into DSBs. The observed correlation
between BRCA1 recruitment into DSBs and cellular viability of olaparib-treated cells further
supports our model. Together with the results from Bouwman et al , who
showed a defect in response to olaparib in BRCT-located mutants R1699Q and V1736A ( 44 ), it seems that the integrity of the BRCA1 BRCT
domain plays a critical role in sensitivity to this agent. Systematic evaluation of other
pathogenic variants in the BRCT, e.g. c.5095C > T; p.Arg1699Trp which is shown to lead to
a stable mutant protein ( 30 ), will be required
in order to assess the ability of these mutants to act in a dominant-negative manner.
Interestingly, two recent studies elucidate a new mechanism of acquired resistance to PARP
inhibitor or cisplatin due to a residual function of RING-less BRCA1 protein ( 45 , 46 ). Thus, missense pathogenic variants in the N-terminal RING domain could
potentially also lead to PARPi resistance and caution should be taken when studying missense
pathogenic variants located in different BRCA1 domains.

Overall, our results suggest that carriers of different types of BRCA1 mutations could show different toxicity to PARP inhibitor olaparib and could benefit from
the treatment in a distinct way. Our findings could be also relevant for a potential use of
PARP inhibitors as prophylactic agents in BRCA1 mutation carriers ( 47 ). Importantly, although all missense variants
represent 8.3% of BRCA1 mutations and missense mutations in the BRCT domain
account for only 2% ( 14 ), our results could be
particularly important for Spanish population where c.5117G > A, p.Gly1706Glu and
c.5123C > A, p.Ala1708Glu together represent close to 15% of all mutations found in BRCA1 ( 48 ). Thus, clearly,
further research on differences between BRCA1 mutation types and the
biology behind PARP inhibition could be of a great importance, particularly in this
population.

Materials and Methods

Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs)

LCLs were established by EBV-transformation of peripheral blood lymphocytes from fifteen
women carrying heterozygous pathogenic variants in BRCA1 ( BRCA1+/- ) and six non-carrier relatives ( BRCA1+/+ )
( Table 2 ), as previously described ( 15 ). Five LCLs carried one of the two missense
pathogenic variants located in the BRCT domain of BRCA1 (c.5117G > A; p.Gly1706Glu or
c.5123C > A; p.Ala1708Glu) and ten LCLs carried variants generating a premature stop
codon (frameshift, nonsense or splice-site). Mutational analysis has been previously
performed by Sanger sequencing. None of the women included in this study had personal
antecedents of cancer.

Panel of lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCLs)

a 1-6
indicate which LCLs were established from relatives (sisters or
mother/daughter).

b Mutation nomenclature
listed uses GenBank reference sequences NM_007294.3 with numbering starting at the
A of the first ATG, following the journal guidelines ( www.hgvs.org/mutnomen );
p.?, unknown protein nomenclature (variant causing skipping of exon 5 of BRCA1 ).

c NMD not
activated by the variant (-), degradation of mutated transcript by NMD (+), not
known functional interpretation (unknown), variant leading to translation
re-iniciation (re-iniciation).

d NMD status
determined by prediction according to the CIMBA (The Consortium of Investigators
of Modifiers of BRCA1/2) database (BRCA1 master list from 19 July 2013) or
experimentally investigated by Buisson et al. , Human Mutation,
2006 (marked with an asterisk).

e Age of
women at the time of blood extraction to establish
LCL.

Tissue culture and treatments

LCLs were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 20% FBS
(Sigma-Aldrich), penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) and Fungizone (Gibco). Cells were
cultured in 25 cm 2 flasks (Corning) and maintained in exponential growth by
daily dilution to 1x10 6 cells/ml in full media. Early passages ( 1–10 ) were used for all experiments.

HEK293FT cells were grown in DMEM media (Sigma-Aldrich) complemented with 10% FBS, 1%
penicillin-streptomycin, and 0.5% Fungizone.

Where noted, cells were incubated with PARP inhibitor Olaparib (Axon Medchem) or its
dissolvent DMSO (Sigma) (control) for indicated period of time. All cells were maintained
in an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 at 37 °C.

MTT colorimetric assay

200ul of cellular suspension was plated in 96-well plate at a density of 10 4 cells/well. Cells were then treated with DMSO or olaparib for 72 h under standard growth
conditions. As LCLs tend to form large cellular aggregates, they were resuspended daily by
pipetting up and down in order to ensure equal distribution of the treatment to all cells.
3 days after the beginning of treatment, 50µl of MTT dissolved in PBS (stock 5mg/ml MTT)
was added onto a plate and incubated under normal growth conditions for 4 h. 50µl of
SDS/HCl solution (500ml SDS 10% + 150µL HCl 37%) was transferred into each well, and the
plates were incubated in a tissue culture incubator for 16 h. Absorbance at 544 nm was
read on a spectrophotometer (Victor 3 Plate Reader; PerkinElmer), data were normalized to
a mean absorbance detected in wells containing media without cells (blank), and the
results were expressed as a percentage of DMSO-treated cells.

Basal PARP enzymatic activity

The PARP enzymatic activity was determined using the HT Chemiluminescent PARP/Apoptosis
Assay kit (Trevigen; #4685-096-K) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with
several modifications. 8x10 6 cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS and lyzed
in 100 μl of Trevigen Cell Extraction Buffer (1x I-PAR Assay buffer; 0.4 mol/L NaCl, 0.9%
Triton X-100, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]) on ice for 30 min and
periodically vortexed. After centrifugation of the cellular lysates at 10,000×g at 4 °C
for 10 min, protein concentration was quantified using DC Protein Assay Kit II (Bio-Rad)
using BSA as a standard. The cellular lysate (10 μg/well) was added in duplicates to the
wells of 96-well plate, which contained PARP buffer and PARP cocktail, and incubated at
room temperature for 1 h. Activated DNA was added only to the standards but not to
extracts, which allowed to measure the basal enzymatic activity. Wells were washed with
PBS and 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBS-T) and incubated with streptavidin horseradish peroxidase
for 1 h and washed again. Chemiluminescent detection was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (EnVision Multilabel Plate Reader; PerkinElmer). The
background luminescence (blank) was subtracted from the readings of the samples and
standards served for calculation of PARP activity from a standard curve.

Cellular growth rate calculation

Differences in the cellular growth rate were determined using the above mentioned MTT
colorimetric assay with some modifications. From each LCL 10 4 cells/well/200ul
full media were plated in hexaplicates into two separate 96-well plates. The first plate
was subjected to an MTT addition at time 0 h whereas the MTT solution was added into the
second plate 72 h later, i.e. the same duration as for determination of sensitivity to
PARP inhibitors was used to determine the growth rate of LCLs. Plates were incubated with
the MTT for 4 h which was followed by incubation with SDS/HCl solution for additional
16 h. Absorbance at 544 nm was measured on a spectrophotometer and the data were
normalized to a mean absorbance detected in wells containing media without cells. The
growth rate was calculated as a ratio between the mean absorbance from 72-h timepoint and
the mean absorbance at 0 h.

RNA extraction and quantification

RNA was extracted using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufactureŕs
instructions. RNA quality and quantity was determined using LabChip technology on Agilent
2100 BioAnalyser (Agilent Technologies) with the value of RNA integrity number (RIN)
between 9.9 and 10.0.

Quantitative real-time RT-PCR

500ng of total RNA was reverse-transcribed by High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription
Kit (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufactureŕs instructions. Using labelled
probes (Roche Universal ProbeLibrary) and TaqMan Universal PCR Mix the cDNAs were analysed
by quantitative RT-PCR assay in an ABI Prism Sequence Detection System 7900HT (Applied
Biosystems).

F-primer 5´-CTGGAGGACGACAAGGAAAA-3’ and R-primer 5´-TGTTGCTACCGATCACCGTA-3’ were used in
the quantitative RT-PCR for detection of PARP1 expression. Expression
levels of HPRT1 and MRLP19 were used as internal
controls and enabled normalization of the samples. Three independent experiments were
performed and the relative expression was calculated using a comparative Ct method.

Western blot analysis

For PARP1 and PAR protein detection, whole cell lysates were prepared. Shortly,
exponentially growing LCLs were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with ice cold
PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) containing protease inhibitor (Roche) for 1 h
on ice. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and supernatants were
transferred into new tubes for further protein quantification using Bio-Rad protein assay
kit.

75μg of proteins from whole cell lysate was loaded per well of 4–12% Bis-Tris gel
(Invitrogen). Separated proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman)
using the NuPage transfer system (Invitrogen) and the membrane was then blocked in Tris
buffered saline containing 0.05% Tween-20 (TBS-T) and 5% milk. Blots were probed with
following primary antibodies: rabbit anti-PARP1 (Cell Signaling; #9542), rabbit anti-PAR
(Calbiochem; #528815), rabbit anti-RAD51 (Santa Cruz; #sc-8349), rabbit anti-GAL4-DBD
(Santa Cruz; #sc-577). Mouse anti-β-actin (Sigma; #A5441) served as loading control. The
secondary antibodies were HRP-conjugated (Dako) and the immunoblots were developed using
the ECL system (GE Healthcare). Western blot X-ray films (Kodak) were scanned and analysed
using ImageJ software.

BRCA1 transcriptional activation assay

A construct containing WT BRCA1 fragment (range of amino acids 1396 − 1863) was used as a
positive control and deleterious variant M1775R as a negative control (Carvalho et
al , 2009) ( 31 ). HEK293FT cells
were seeded in 24-well tissue culture plates in a concentration 5 × 10 4 cells/well. 24 h later, cells were transfected with vectors containing studied BRCA1
variants in triplicates with Fugene 6 (Promega) according to the manufacturer's
instructions. To mimic the heterozygous status, co-transfection of WT BRCA1 and pFLAG-CMV3
vector containing the BRCA1 A1708E variant (exons 16–24) and lacking the GAL4 DNA binding
domain (GAL4-DBD) was performed. The vectors containing the variants were co-transfected
with pG5Luc, which contains a firefly luciferase reporter gene driven by GAL4-responsive
binding sites, and phGR-TK, which contains a Renilla luciferase gene
driven by a constitutive TK basal promoter used as an internal control. 24 h
post-transfection, growth medium was replaced by a medium containing either DMSO or 16μM
OLP. Cells were harvested 24 h after the treatment, and luciferase activity was measured
using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) following the manufacturer's
instructions. Activity was plotted as a percentage of the WT BRCA1 activity of
DMSO-treated cells.

Mass spectrometry

DMSO- or 16μM OLP-treated HEK293FT cells overexpressing pNTAP-BRCA1-BRCT construct were
collected, lysed and proteins were extracted. Previously described protocol was used
(Woods et al , 2012) to perform the mass spectrometry experiment. Briefly,
protein fractions created by SDS-PAGE were excised, destained, reduced, alkylated and
digested with trypsin (Promega). Peptides were eluted from the gel and concentrated using
vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (U3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA)
coupled to an electrospray ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ or LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo, San
Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. Raw files were
searched against the SwissProt human database (release year 2014) using a search engine
Mascot (Matrix Science) (Perkins et al . 1999). The
assignments were manually verified by inspection of the tandem mass spectra and coalesced
into Scaffold reports (v.2.0, available at www.proteomesoftware.com ) for
statistical analysis and data presentation. The Scaffold software was used to validate
MS-MS based peptide and protein identifications. After applying the SAINT (Significance
Analysis of INTeractome) algorithm and setting a probability threshold of 0.8 − 1, a final
list of 121 protein interactors was selected.

BRCA1 recruitment into DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)

Twelve DMSO- (control) and 10μM OLP-treated LCLs were seeded into poly-L-lysine-coated
(Sigma-Aldrich) µCLEAR bottom 96-well plate (Greiner Bio-One) at a density 75000
cells/100ul full media/well and cultured 2 h before fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde
(Aname). Cells were then permeabilised with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS and stained with
primary and secondary antibodies: rabbit anti-γH2AX (Abcam; #ab11174), mouse anti-BRCA1
(Calbiochem; #OP92), anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488- and anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor
568-conjugated secondary antibodies from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen; #A-11034 and
#A-11031, respectively). 4′,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI) was used to
visualize nuclei. Fluorescent images were automatically acquired from each well of the
96-well plate using an Opera High-Content Screening System (Perkin Elmer). Pictures were
taken at no saturating conditions using a 40x magnification lens and the intensity of
BRCA1 fluorescent signal within detected γH2AX nuclear foci was evaluated for each LCL.
Only cells with at least 1 γH2AX nuclear foci were analysed and 1500 cells/LCL (merge of
two duplicates) were included in the analysis.

Statistical analyses

To test the statistical difference between groups of LCLs independent samples Student´s
t-test was used for normally distributed variables and Mann-Whitney U test for non-normal
data distribution. Calculations were done using SPSS Statistics software (version 17.0;
IBM) and plots were created with GraphPad Prism (version 5.03; GraphPad Software
( www.graphpad.com ) and Microsoft Office
Excel, Microsoft).

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Material is
available at HMG online.

Supplementary Material

Acknowledgements

We thank all the families who volunteered to participate in this study and the Cellex
Foundation.

Conflict of Interest statement . None declared.

Funding

The study was funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO)
SAF2014-57680-R and the Spanish Network on Rare Diseases (CIBERER). This work was
partially supported by NIH U01 award CA116167 and a grant from the Florida Breast Cancer
Foundation.

References

Associated Data

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.

Supplementary Materials